You
Thank you everyone. I'm sorry a little trouble getting my my video to stop there. I'm not yet
the master of the zoom medium. Though you'd think after a year and a half of COVID we would all be
great experts. It's a it's a huge pleasure today to welcome you all to this live lecture with Dr. Ian
McGillchrist. I'm Stephen Blackwood. I'm the president of Ralston College, a new institution of
higher education. I'm streaming live from the beautiful city of Savannah in the state of Georgia
in the United States. I welcome you all here. I know we have a wide range of time zones. So it's
good morning, good afternoon or good evening depending on where you are. I know that Dr. Ian
McGillchrist needs little introduction. We're honored to have him as a visitor of the college.
He is a psychiatrist, a literary scholar, a philosopher in the true sense of the term a
polymath, a man who has learned about many different disciplines and fields of knowledge
in very deep and interconnected ways. And in fact, that interconnection is one of the persistent
themes of his work that I think is sure to come out today. Dr. McGillchrist has written a new book
which is about to be published. It's a landmark work or going to be. It's a very substantial
two volume book called The Matter with Things. And the lecture today is going to be a,
as it were, an introduction to at least some of the themes that are sketched or not sketched,
but argued at length in that book. His title today is called The Coincidence of Opposites.
And those of you who've had the chance perhaps to study philosophy will know that this is an
ancient theme going back to the earliest moments of recorded human thinking. And I know that we're
all looking forward to see just how Dr. McGillchrist introduces this to us. I wanted to note that he
has shared with us a couple of pages of preliminary reading. I know that was shared with all of you
in advance, but it's on our website at www.rollston.ac on the webpage for this event. If you haven't
had a chance to read that, you can do so afterwards. All right. The format today will be that Dr.
McGillchrist, to whom I'll turn things over momentarily, is going to give us a lecture
of somewhere around an hour or thereabouts. And then we're going to open things up for a
conversation and audience questions. So please feel free to shoot as many questions as you like
through the chat. Dr. McGillchrist and I will do our best to get through as many of them as we can,
and to make this as conversational and richly participatory as we can.
Anyway, with that said, Dr. McGillchrist, oh, I need to say one more thing, and that is that
you'll see that Dr. McGillchrist's screen is a little low resolution. Well, I received an email
from him just a couple of hours ago saying that on the Isle of Skye off the northwest coast of
Scotland, where he lives on the Talisker Bay, some of you may know the whiskey Talisker,
if you don't, I encourage you to sample it, that there is a torrential rainstorm currently
underway, a violent bit of weather. And because his internet capabilities are mediated by a
satellite, it is affected by the weather. We're independently recording this lecture
in Ian's office there in both video and audio, so we anticipate having a high level of
production in what we can subsequently share as a podcast and on YouTube. But I must,
Dr. McGillchrist and I both ask for your patience with respect to the what could be some interruptions
today. Stick with us. I know it will be worthwhile. And perhaps there's something good
in being reminded about the insurmountable realities of nature that even our confident
technology cannot ultimately, reliably always tame. Anyway, with that introduction, Ian,
what a great pleasure to see you. Thank you so much for joining us today.
Oh, thank you so much, Stephen. And it's been a great honor to be
accepted as a visitor of Rawson College. And I wish Rawson College and yourself
every conceivable success as it flourishes and goes forward. So thank you for inviting me along
here tonight. As you hear, I have a rather oppositional relationship with technology,
and usually it finds ways of frustrating me. And tonight it's doing so mediated by a good old storm.
So I'll do my best. Now as Stephen was mentioning, I've been spending the last
10, 12 years writing a book called The Matter with Things, which is a pun, as you can possibly
imagine, on several levels. And one of the things that we, in my view, get wrong is that we fail to
understand anymore that things and their opposites are not as irreconcilable and as far apart from
one another as they might seem. That may be a product of a number of things, the history of
philosophy, but it's imaged in our love of straight lines. So the two ends of a straight line, you
think as far as you project them in one direction, they get further and further away from the end
of the line in the opposite, as we call it, direction. Since my teens, I've not thought that
this was actually the case, and that opposites tended eventually to coincide. Anyway, I'll have
some reflections to say about this from a number of viewpoints, and a few reflections on the current
state of things in our society, where I believe if we could grasp the idea that opposites do not have
this linearly irreconcilable relationship, we might produce a happier world and a better
society. What we call opposites are often facets of one and the same thing. So I'm going to talk
about this from a number of angles, and I wanted to start with three quotations, which are actually
also on the little piece that I shared with you earlier, which relates a most extraordinary
Iroquois legend, the legend of the Onondaga people, and I do urge you to read it. It was brought to
my attention by an anthropologist who commented on the extraordinary number of parallels between
it and the thesis of the master and his emissary, and I will refer to it very briefly. But first of
all, I want to mention three sayings. The first is from a philosopher, the second from a physicist,
and the third from a poet, and I find myself in my writing often drawing these three strands
together incidentally. From C. S. Perse, the American pragmatist philosopher,
a thing without oppositions, ipso facto does not exist. Existence lies in opposition.
Existence lies in opposition.
Then from Niels Bohr, it is the hallmark of any deep truth that its negation is also a deep truth.
So that not only things have this contrary constitution, as Perse was pointing out, but
that the things that we see as opposites often are not opposites at a deep level. There are many
superficial truths that are obviously mutually exclusive. Either I had milk in my coffee at
breakfast time or I didn't, and Bohr was very willing to accept that, but he saw more and more
that the deeper you went into the structure of reality, the more it was the case that a thing
and its opposite could be true at the same time. And the third is from the German romantic
poet Friedrich Höllerlin. The heart's wave would never have risen up so beautifully in its
cloud of spray and become spirit, were it not for the grim old cliff of destiny standing in its way.
Another theme that's very important in my work is that of the creative nature of resistance.
In fact, nothing can be created. Nothing can come into being without resistance.
As you know, if you know anything about my work, I have been involved for 30 years or more
in researching differences between the two brain hemispheres. And these two brain hemispheres
illustrate something rather important that they work together but apart. They co-operate by opposing
one another. And that is actually very much like the way nature in general works. We've
brought into a myth that actually all the history of nature is one of competition.
But it's as much or more, I would argue, and many biologists would argue,
it's more a history of co-operation. And the coming together of competition and co-operation
produces what I call collaboration. And the two hemispheres need to inhibit one another,
to inform one another. They need to stand back and away from one another and at times to work
in unison. They have an interesting relationship which is oppositional but by no means contradictory.
And that is really beautifully brought out in the Iroquois legend of these two brothers that
create the world. And they have this difference of stance. But one knows more than the other and
needs to keep the other one under its aegis, under its watchful eye. And that is, as I argued in the
book The Master and His Emissary, the relationship between the right and the left hemisphere. So
the right hemisphere understands and sees things that the left hemisphere doesn't. And that for
that reason, the left hemisphere should always be in service to the right hemisphere. It makes
a very good servant but a very poor master. Everything that exists could be thought of as
a form of energy. After all, one of the most famous equations in the world, E equals mc2,
tells us that energy and mass are inter-convertible. Energy is always characterized by the coming
together of apparent opposites. Apparent because this is how we've conceived things left hemisphere
fashion. As in the positive and negative poles of electricity, the north and south poles of the
magnet, or in a quite different sense, the merging of male and female gametes in the origin of new
life. And interestingly, if you see cell division under a microscope, it looks extraordinary like
the work of a magnet with iron filings. There are famous illustrations of this and it's been
commented on since the middle of the 19th century. The best known expression of the idea of complementary
opposites is that of the Taijitu symbol, commonly known as the yin yang symbol. And yin yang is
probably the most sophisticated expression of an idea that is existent in cultures all over the world.
From all parts of the world that I know through anthropology, that is a myth of
two opposite forces that need one another. And the fact that it's been somewhat vulgarized is not a
any argument against it any more than the fact that there are mistaken followers of a religion
vitiates the importance of that religion. But we do live a known world in which we want to
try and simplify. And this business of the coming together of opposites frustrates that wish to be
simple. You often hear people of a spiritual bent saying, all is one. And it sounds wonderful,
doesn't it? It sounds so calming. It sounds so deep. All is one. And it's true. But so is it that
all is many. And now what? Neither of these truths is a lesser truth than the other. Indeed,
one of the ways of looking at the whole creative cosmos is of the continuing unfolding, the endless
unfolding of individuation out of union, not so as to thunder or fragment, but so as to enrich
that whole. So I would say the very drive of the cosmos is about distinction without separation.
Gerta said, and Gerta, to me, is one of the all time greatest minds, indeed a true polymath,
a poet, a philosopher, a playwright, a statesman, a scientist, a man of enormous wisdom. And what
he said was dividing the united, uniting the divided is the very life of nature. This is
the eternal sisterly and deasterly, the eternal coalescence and separation, the inhalation and
exhalation of the world in which we live, and where our existence is woven, a very beautiful
and important word that woven about the coming together of different threads in the tapestry or
in the net to create something new. And we think of this idea as essentially one that is
eastern in origin. But as I've just pointed out, it's there in the western tradition,
even Gerta at the time of the Enlightenment was saying it. And in the earliest and in my view
greatest of all the Greek philosophers, Heraclitus, he said many things that are relevant, but I just
want to mention two. They do not understand, he said, how a thing agrees at variance with itself.
It is an attunement turning back on itself, like that of the bow and the liar.
The word he used there is harmonia, the origin of our concept of harmony. And the idea of harmony,
of course, is not that everything is the same, but that everything within the harmony is different,
but is brought into a fruitful union with all the other parts of the harmony.
And the image of the bow and the liar are simple and very powerful. The ends of a
liar string are pulled apart. Effort is put into torturing that string. And you might think,
why pull in opposite directions? Why not just simplify and not pull at all? But then the
string goes slack. It's no longer taught. And there is no note that comes forth from the
string of the liar. There is no arrow that comes forth from the string of the bow. Its existence
depends on exactly this balance of pulling in opposite directions. Harmony in the Greek of
Heraclitus had three principal meanings. One was the fitting together of surfaces.
As we say, surfaces that are true to one another, or as we say, marry. If you're a carpenter,
you talk about a true fit, or a surfaces marrying. The second is the reconciling of warring parties.
So Heraclitus famously said that war is the father of all things, but he could have said that
peace is the queen of all things, because both this war and peace need to be harmonized.
And it's in its most common, modern meaning, the accord of musical strings.
The second saying of Heraclitus I'd like to advert to is another one, I think probably the
richest and the most difficult to understand. And it begins with the word salipsis, or in his
or in his Ionic Greek, Syllapsius. But anyway, we would say salipsis. Graspings, it's translated,
hole and not holes, convergent divergent, consonant dissonant, from all things one
and from one things all. Now the Greek word salipsis here translated grasping seems again
to suggest several ideas, something grasped, perhaps suggesting sudden comprehension,
something that brings elements together, and fertility. Aristotle uses the word to mean the
sexual generation of life, coming together, as I mentioned earlier, of the male and female gametes.
It's hard to overestimate the richness of this fragment, it says so many things at once, that
a deep understanding of the nature of reality comes in glimpses, or grasping, moments of insight,
that in that insight, which by the way is very robustly associated with the right cerebral
hemisphere, particularly with the right superior temporal area, that in those moments of insight,
all is neither simply single nor simply manifold, neither simply whole nor simply not whole,
neither simply like nor simply unlike, each thing working with and by the same token working against
the others, that the one and the many bring one another forth into being, together generating
the reality that has this structure at its core. And that despite, or in light of all this perhaps
because of the nature of this multiplicity, all is held together in a salipsis, the only word here,
not to be paired with its antithesis. And the whole saying is itself, of course, a salipsis,
a gathering, which in its fertility births a salipsis, a moment of dawning insight in us.
So to move right forward from the sixth century BC, to the last hundred years,
we've discovered that not only can small elements in matter manifest either as a wave,
or as a particle that seem contrary types of element, but they can manifest as waves and
particles simultaneously. And here again is a very important idea that we don't have to see one
and then the other, but see them nested within one another. Thus we're used to thinking of the
individual and the general, the temporal and the eternal, the embodied and the disembodied as
exclusive pairings. But it was possibly Goethe's greatest insight to see that they're present
simultaneously in one another. They're found not by turning one's back on the supposed opposite,
but by going more deeply into it. Thus the general is found in the individual, the eternal in the
temporal, the spiritual in the embodied. This tension is creative, generative. Although a
thing and its opposite or a thing and its negative are customarily thought of as separate warring
entities, they are, I argue, mutually sustaining, inseparable and intertwined. You cannot have
heat without cold or brightness without darkness. We can't keep the mountains, as Alan Watts put
it, and get rid of the valleys. And we have one such enigma at the very core of our being,
the corpus callosum, the body of fibers that connects the two hemispheres at their base.
In connecting, it separates. In separating, it connects. And as if being intuitively aware of
this in the Upanishads, we read, in the space within the heart lies the controller of all.
He is the bridge that serves as the boundary to keep the different worlds apart.
An interesting gloss on the idea of a bridge.
Quite a homely example of that, of course, is the eardrum. The eardrum separates one part of
the ear from another. But without it, we couldn't hear sound at all. It's actually caused by the
vibrations, the reverberations, the to and fro movement of this separative element.
Often inhibition releases and creates. Often delimitation is what makes a thing come into
being. Indeed, that is what defines anything. And friction is an interesting example of something
that is, in a way, in opposition to movement. But in its absence, movement becomes impossible.
It's the very constraint, isn't it, on movement, friction. But it's also what makes movement
possible at all. It's true in its excess, we're immobilized, yet so we are in its absence. There's
nothing to push against. Resistance can put the brakes on motion or cause motion. It can prevent
or cause change. It prevents us with an obstacle and thereby forces us to shift our point of view.
It helps us shift the plane of focus so that we see something new. In itself, resistance
is neither necessarily good nor necessarily bad. It's just necessary.
To make a good apple pie, you don't need bland apples. You need nice tart apples and very good
sweet honey. William Blake wrote, without contraries is no progression. Attraction and repulsion,
reason and energy, love and hate are necessary to human existence. And we shouldn't try to get
round this by saying, well, yes, actually, but there's a way of blending them so that we don't
have to deal with that. The philosopher Jacob Needleman wrote, stay with the contradiction.
If you stay, you will see that there's always something more than two opposing truths. The
whole truth always includes a third part, which is the reconciliation. Those of you who are familiar
with the philosophy of Hegel will know the concept of Aufhebern, that coming together of two things
that appear to be opposite into a fruitful new union. But it's not just Hegel, one of my favorite
philosophers, and I believe one of the greatest of the last 100 years is Alfred North Whitehead,
again, a great philosopher, mathematician and scientist. To have seen it from one side only
is not to have seen it. He also said, by the way, that there are no whole truths, only half
truths, is taking the half truths for whole truths that plays the devil. My word, I wish politicians
and their over-vocal spokesman on the internet remembered that fact.
Opposites, please remember this, genuinely coincide while remaining opposites.
Some philosophies tend to collapse into the monism that opposites are identical.
Others into the dualism that opposites remain irreconcilable and are merely at most juxtaposed.
The important perception is that opposites not only co-indexist, but give rise to and fulfill
one another. As Nils Bohr said, Contraria sunt complementa. He took that as his
family motto when he was ennobled by the Danish government. Contraries fulfill one another. And
they're conjoined, like the poles of a magnet, who can't have one without the other, but without
there being any intervening boundary. They nonetheless remain distinct as opposites. This
idea of complementarity is foundational in nature. It's foundational certainly in
everything in modern physics. I would say in morality and I would say in spirituality.
So, for example, to turn one's back on the parts, the work that the left hemisphere brings forward
for us, and except only the whole, the work that the right hemisphere gives us, is not to get back
to wholeness, because the whole is never an annihilation, but rather a subsumption of the
parts. The true whole exists precisely in this relationship, the tension between parts and an
apparent whole. Moreover, morally speaking, every angel has his devil. And I wish I could show you,
but for copyright reasons, I don't dare show you, a wonderful image by MC Escher called Circle Limit 4,
often called Angels and Devils. If you look that up, that up, perhaps later, I hope,
you will see why it is a particularly beautiful illustration of what I'm talking about.
But you know, in our society we are beset, aren't we, by what we call paradoxes. We pursue happiness
and become measurably less happy over time. We privilege autonomy and end up bound by rules
to which we never assented and more spied on than any people since the beginning of time.
We pursue leisure through technology and discover that the average working day is longer than
ever and that we have less time than we had before. The means to our ends are ever more available,
while we have less sense of what our end should be or whether there's purpose in anything at all.
Economists carefully model and monitor the financial markets in order to avoid any future
crash. They promptly crash. We are so eager that all scientific research results in positive findings
that has become progressively less adventurous and more predictable and therefore discovers less
and less that is a truly significant advance in scientific thinking. We grossly misconceive the
nature of study in the humanities as utilitarian in order to get value for money and thus render it
pointless and in this form certainly a waste of resource. We improve education by dictating
curricula and focusing on exam results to the point where free thinking, arguably an overarching
goal of true education, is discouraged. In our universities many students are in any case so
frightened that the truth might turn out not to conform to their theoretical model that they
demand to be protected from discussions that threaten to examine the model critically
and their teachers who should know better in a serious dereliction of duty collude.
We over sanitize and cause vulnerability to infection. We overuse antibiotics leading to
super bacteria that no antibiotic can kill. We make drugs illegal to protect society and while
failing comprehensively to control the use of drugs we create a fertile field for crime. We
protect children in such a way that they cannot cope with let alone relish uncertainty or risk
and are rendered vulnerable. The left hemisphere's motivation is control
and its means of achieving it alarmingly linear as though it could see only one of the arrows
in a vastly complex network of recursive interactions at any one time which is all it can.
I want to mention something called hormesis it's a term from chemistry
and what it refers to is a familiar phenomenon which a very small amount of something may have
highly beneficial effects but a larger amount may kill you. Some scientists were rather puzzled
when they were trying to account for what happened in an experimental environment called
biosphere 2 which is a very large covered sheltered environment in which plants and trees are given
what are seen as an optimal environment in which to flourish and it was discovered that trees
rarely reached maturity before they fell over. Why was this? Well it turns out that actually being
subject to stressful winds is extremely important for the growth and survival of a tree. It produces
something called stress wood which is the core strength of it. As so often Nietzsche got there
a long time before the 21st century scientists examined the lives he said of the best and most
fruitful people and peoples and asked yourself whether a tree which is supposed to grow to a
proud height could do without bad weather and storms. Whether misfortune and external resistance
whether any kinds of hatred jealousy stubbornness mistrust hardness greed and violence do not belong
to the favorable conditions without which any great growth even of virtue is scarcely possible.
And there are many examples in medicine digitalis atropine arsenic will be familiar to doctors and
to some patients. Even radiation in small amounts can suppress tumors relative to creatures who are
raised in an environment in highly free of radiation and a deadly poison called dioxin
in very small amounts can heal tumors. I am not by any means please understand me excusing
in any sense the pollution of our environment my whole point is that these are highly toxic
but that in very small amounts they may be beneficial. Changing of context completely changes
what can be said to be true so that something can come to mean its opposite. There are many
profound examples of this from religious text and from poetry but one I rather like just because
it's so every day is the sizes of cereal packets you know I think in America there are four sizes
of cereal packets there's one called jumbo which means very large then there's one called economy
which means large then there's one called family which means medium then finally there's one called
large which means small. Things change depending on the context which is why taking a statement
that anyone says out of the context without everything else that said or even without the
tone of voice which may betray a completely different meaning is so treacherous. From any
one standpoint also only a part of the picture is possible and I say that not because as it where
we might be able to get around this if we had some other way of doing things intrinsically
it is possible only to take in one part of a reality at a time and what I conceive objectivity
to be is not to affect some cast of mind in which there is nothing human that would be very strange
way of looking at things that wouldn't be particularly rich in its ability to reveal
the nature of the thing but to instead see as many points of view on something as you possibly can
and that's part of what Whitehead meant talking about half truths and you are needing the other
half of the truth to see it from one side only is not to have seen it and in fact in Japanese there's
a term Tambankan for a person who only sees one side and what it means is somebody who carries
a board on their shoulder so that they only see with one half of their field of vision.
Also another Japanese image comes to mind that I love one of the greatest of all the Zen gardens
Riyanji has I think 15 rocks in it but it is so constructed that there is no place in the garden
from which you can see all of the rocks the most you can see at any one point would be 14
and in our world I'm afraid we neglect often the dark side everything has its dark side
that is really a central message to be taken home there is nothing so good that it cannot
have negative consequences and indeed there is nothing so bad that it cannot
occasionally give rise to good. Neglecting this unfortunately leads to extremism as a psychiatrist
one of the hardest things to deal with is a person who believes they should be
perfect and therefore in denial about their imperfections these people become very stressed
anxious and unhappy and actually spread anxiety and unhappiness around them in their families
trying to control everything for good instead of realizing that actually they can't do that
and that they would be better to exercise a wise ability to move flexibly with the flow.
I've talked a bit about a straight line the German great highly eccentric painter and architect
actually sorry I did him a well not an injustice but I made an error there calling him German he
was in fact an Austrian Friedensreich Hundertwasser wrote in 1953 I realized that the straight line
leads to the downfall of mankind but the straight line has become an absolute tyranny the straight
line is something cowardly drawn with a rule without thought or feeling it is a line which
does not exist in nature and that line is the rotten foundation of our doomed civilization
the straight line is atheistic and immoral it is the only sterile line the only line which
does not suit man as the image of god the straight line is the forbidden fruit the straight line is
the curse of our civilization any design undertaken with the straight line will be stillborn today
we are witnessing the triumph of rationalist know-how and yet at the same time we find ourselves
confronted with emptiness an aesthetic void a desert of uniformity criminal sterility loss
of creative power even creativity is prefabricated we have become impotent we are no longer able
to create that is our real illiteracy well he certainly put it like it is and I think
it's a very fine piece of writing it's not his only words on this topic but I like to put this
together with something communicated to me personally by a member of the Swiss parliament
Lukas Fiertz who is a founding member of the Green Party in Switzerland who recalled a meeting
as a boy with his neighbor Carl Gustav Jung and in the course of conversation Jung told us says
Lukas Fiertz about his encounter with a Pueblo chief whose name was Mountain Lake the chief
told him that the white man was doomed when asked why the chief took both hands before his eyes and
Jung imitating the gesture moved the outstretched index fingers convergingly towards one point
before him saying because the white man looks only at one point excluding all other aspects
many years later dr. Fiertz who's a physician recalls that a significant adversary of the
Green Party movement was a successful industrialist and self-made billionaire
I asked him what in his view was the reason for his incredible entrepreneurial and political
success he took both hands before his eyes and moved the outstretched index fingers convergingly
towards one point before him saying because I am able to concentrate on only one point excluding
all other aspects I remember that I had to swallow hard two or three times so as not to say anything
so some reflections on this perfect linearity and the structure of reality
William Blake thought that there even must be sorrow in heaven if there was to be joy
and in a well-known poem he wrote it is right that it should be so
man was made for joy and woe joy and woe are woven fine a clothing for the soul divine
under every grief and pine runs a joy with silken twine
perfection can constitute a flaw in traditional chinese houses the last three
tiles are always left off the roof because the saying is even heaven is not perfect
and in oriental rug making there is something called the imperfect stitch which is deliberately
lacking my first book against criticism was in a way a description of a strange phenomenon
why it is that when you start taking apart the qualities of analyzing the greatness of
a great literary figure you end up with a handful of things that are in themselves imperfections
and yet they put them together they do not in any way account for the greatness of the individual
uh i wrote about three of them in that book in particular
one the essayist and general philosopher and thinker sam johnson then the novelist lauren
stern and then the poet william wordsworth in physics we again have both a combination
of order with disorder and it wouldn't be good to have just one without the other
as david oliver says a physicist nature is neither inevitably random nor completely lawful
and predictable quantum spontaneity is only one half the story the other half is the regularity
and that what's often called the edge of chaos is terribly important existence coexistence of
order with disorder the critic and poet william empson wrote extremely often in dealing with
the world one arrives at two ideas or ways of dealing with things which both work and are needed
but which entirely contradict one another and we all experienced this don't be at every level
from the most innocently trivial uh or least trivial seeming to the most sublime we need
universality and particularity precision and flexibility restriction and openness freedom
and constraint simultaneously everything flows from the pairing we as we say lose ourselves
and consequently find ourselves in music dance or contemplation of a beautiful painting or landscape
there is an innocence the other side of experience and knowledge the other side of
knowing a wisdom the other side of folly which is not really its opposite the only simplicity
for which i would give a straw said that rather down to earth jurist oliver wendell holmes is
that which is on the other side of the complex not that which has never divided and joseph
camber writes i think there are three states of being one is the innocent expression of nature
another is when you pause analyze think about it then having analyzed there comes a state in
which you're able to live as nature again but with more competence more control more flexibility
that to me summarizes the proper relationship between the right and the left hemisphere the right
seeing the initial hole the left uh taking it apart in certain ways but crucially not ending
there but giving it back to the right hemisphere that can understand it now in an enriched unfolded
hole according to jung the grand plan on which the unconscious life of the psyche is constructed is so
inaccessible to our understanding that we can never know what evil way not evil may not be necessary
in order to produce good by what he called enantiadromia which basically means the tendency of
things to change into their opposites and what good may very possibly lead to evil a very striking
example from the natural sphere is the concept of a keystone keystone species in yellowstone park
the wolves were more or less eliminated in the 1930s the uh ecosphere as we now say deteriorated
the number of elk dwindled the number of beaver dwindled the number of willow trees dwindled
and then it was decided that actually the wolves played a very important part and they were
reintroduced and since they were reintroduced there are more elk there are more beavers and there are
more willows it sounds paradoxical but the thing is that the presence of the predator keeps the
elk's moving so they don't overgraze and destroy the landscape they move and flourish and because
the the trees flourish and they're no longer eaten up by the elk the beavers which need the trees
come back and flourish and so on and there are many many examples of this in nature where what
looks like the evil predator is in fact the key to life so instead of a um a linear model I would
prefer one of circularity or to modify that of a spiral the circle simply comes back to the same
place and is static a spiral is constantly moving and changing and as you come back around a loop
of the spiral you seem to be at the same place you were before but you're not actually you're
above it and you see what it was you thought you knew when you were there before but you don't
yet anticipate what you will know when you go on yet another loop of the spiral and come back to the
cognate point again on a higher loop and what I particularly like about the spiral is images
when you look down its axis it images the circularity but when you look at it from the side it images
the linearity. Empedocles who was another great uh pre-socratic philosopher thought there were two
opposing and equal forces that gave rise to everything love phylotes that is and strife
naikot in the presence of love only or strife only nothing could exist these forces for union and for
division according to empedocles are present in the very stuff of all things not just in their
ultimate origin and they're imaged as a circle not just as a straight line the idea of complementarity
coming back to the parts and and the whole again recognizes the nature of the earth's true essence
this was something particularly well expressed by the scientist and philosopher shelling
who I have come more and more greatly to honor and admire early 19th late 18th early 19th
German philosophy he says this about the relationship between the one and the many between
the unique and the general which is actually another chapter of my book and could be another talk
but not for tonight only in the bond by virtue of which it eternally asserts its unity as the
multiplicity of its things and conversely this multiplicity as its unity is the earth expressive
of its true essence and it's not that you think that apart from this infinity of things to be
found in the earth there's another one which is the unity of these things rather the same
that is the multiplicity is also the unity and the same that is the unity is also the multiplicity
and so on existence is the conjunction of one with itself as a many and this conjunction of one
and many is a very important topic and this process may sound as though it is linear but
it's not it is a circular process and this depends on an inter-hemispheric relationship
functioning properly in which like the two brothers in the Onondagen myth flint the left
hemisphere representative who actually in the story this was before neuroscience could have
prompted this has the arrow and speech and the two great things about manipulation using the
right hand to grasp things and to use language to pin them down that are the most archetypal I
suppose aspects of the hemisphere these were flint characteristics and they are necessary we're
enriched by language we're enriched by enabling to use a bow and arrow but only in the service of
something greater that the that flint doesn't understand that his brother does understand
and his brother sees that he needs to keep relatively close to the the less wise the less
intelligent brother in order that the work of that brother should be profitable and good
but not too close because he can't afford to lose what it is that he is able to do through
his goodness and his greater wisdom in the cabala a great corpus of Jewish mystical literature
the structure of human faculties takes the form of a tree with a right hand side and
a left hand side very interesting to me humanities task is to integrate them both
laterally and vertically specifically it's held that the mind is made up of two faculties wisdom
hochma on the right which receives the gestalt of a situation in a single flash and understanding
bina opposite it on the left which builds them up in a replicable step by step way this is the
distinction between the right and left hemisphere at least one way of looking at it hochma and bina
are considered two friends who never part because you cannot have one without the other hochma gives
rise to a force for loving fusion with the other while bina gives rise to judgment which is responsible
for setting boundaries and limits their integration is another faculty called dart which is a bit like
Aristotle's phronesis or even software and embodied overarching intuitive capacity to know
what the situation calls for and to do it what is more this tree is a true organism each part
reflected in and qualified by co presence with each of the others so what is united is to be
divided and what divided is to be united this involves cyclical returns it follows from this
cyclical nature that if you go far enough in any one direction you reach not more of what you desired
but it's opposite go east and you eventually reach the west and it follows that both of two
opposites are simultaneously present and need to be so just as east and west are simultaneously
present on the campus and need to be so not just to navigate the world but to have a world to navigate
i finally want to reflect on an asymmetry at the heart of the coincidentia positorum
union and division which i've mentioned a lot in this talk are asymmetrical
the principle for division and the principle for union are both needed but they're needed
to be brought together not divided we need the union of union and division not the division
of union and division and in our thinking today we need not either both and or either or but we
need both both and and either or equally we need not non duality only but we need the non duality
of duality and non duality there's also an asymmetry between symmetry and asymmetry
not just an asymmetry of quality which obviously is but an inequality of value
asymmetry is more important than symmetry actual occurrence of anything involves the
breaking of what is considered in the abstract symmetrical small imbalances differences among
sameness at all levels in nature make it work starting with the initial inequality of matter
and antimatter i'm told by physicists that if there had not been a small inequality between
matter and antimatter at the very beginning of things with the big bang the would have been
nothing at all and this is nicely referred to by two great late 19th century french scientists
one a biologist the other a physicist already in the 1870s Louis Pasteur was writing sentences
that would have anguished his enlightenment forebears the universe as a whole he wrote is
asymmetrical and i've come to believe that life as it has manifest to us is a function of the
asymmetry of the universe without any doubt i repeat of the basic principles of life are
asymmetrical it is because asymmetrical forces of the cosmos preside over their unfolding
life is dominated by the effects of asymmetrical forces whose enveloping cosmic existence we sense
intuitively i would even say that living species are primordially in their structure in their
external forms functions of the cosmic asymmetry and here is the physicist Pierre Curie writing
in 1894 certain elements of symmetry may coexist with certain phenomena but they're not necessary
what is necessary is that certain elements of symmetry do not exist it is asymmetry which
creates the phenomenon and he adds the effects produced may be more symmetrical than their causes
in terms of the hemispheres it's once more not a symmetrical but an asymmetrical arrangement
not just between two dispositions that of the left hemisphere and that of the right towards the world
but between the disposition that sees the two dispositions as an antagonism that must ultimately
lead to the triumph of one and the annihilation of the other that's the left hemisphere's take on
their relation and the disposition that of the right that sees they need to be preserved together
neither being allowed to extinguish the other even though they're not of equal value one the
disposition of the right overarches and takes into account the other much as he grasps the sky with
both hands not just protects flint but enables the fulfillment of flint's contribution
here there's an interesting reflection of William James who I think again is one of the great
philosophers of the last hundred years and more looking back on my own experiences they all
converge towards a kind of insight to which I cannot help ascribing some metaphysical significance
the keynote of it is invariably a reconciliation it is as if the opposites of the world whose
contradictoryness and conflict make all our difficulties and troubles were melted into unity
not only do they as contrasted species belong to one and the same genus but one of the species
the nobler and better one is itself the genus and so soaks up and absorbs its opposite into itself
that we mentioned sisterly and deasterly and on this nature of asymmetry and irregularity
being more important than symmetry and and regularity I just want to mention something about
the movement and rhythm of biological processes these are necessarily not entirely
rhythmical they have a kind of flexibility built into them which for those of you who are
musicians you will recognize as rubato music that is played entirely mechanically loses
its soul and it is the ability to make very small differences in the length of notes
that makes a great musical performance you may not even be aware of them in fact you're not
necessarily aware of them at all but they are what give life and I was very struck when I was
a medical student and I was learning obstetrics on the obstetric board when learned that the
trace of the fetal heart when it became regular this was a medical emergency and you called the
team urgently the when the fetus is thriving the heartbeat has a flexibility and irregularity
that also the adult human heart has if it's functioning properly and this is something also
like half rhyme the sort of yes and no at the same time I'd like to write a book called yes and no
or in a zen saying not always so and I can't resist just quoting because I'm about to conclude
that wonderful poem by Wilfred Owen who used half rhyme so effectively visionary spine chilling poem
called strange meeting in which he imagines encountering the German soldier that he's killed
the other that is not really an other at all and the poem famously ends with the dead soldier's words
to Owen I am the enemy you killed my friend I knew you in this dark for so you frowned yesterday
through me as you jabbed and killed I parried but my hands were loath and cold let us sleep now
those lines couldn't be so great if they had had full rhymes instead of half rhymes
it's interesting by the way that the Russian word for other or different to goi has the same
etymological root as the word drug which means a friend anyway I'm going to just wrap up in
some final words so I've argued that at the origin of everything there lies a
coincidence or conjunction of opposites that is profoundly generative indeed necessary for creation
gives rise to all that we know and that this coincidence of opposites is by no means contrary
to reason I've stressed that we must not be tempted left hemisphere fashion to resolve the
necessary tension by pretending one of the pairs of opposites can safely be dispensed with or is
not real denying the concealed opposite is dangerous the coincidence of opposites does
not compromise their nature as opposites rather they fulfill themselves through one another
at the foundation of everything is this opposition recognized from empedocles to girta
between love and strife we need the union of division and union the union of multiplicity and
unity the left hemisphere needs ultimately to act as servants the right hemisphere since unbridled
the left hemisphere is capable of destroying the world which I believe it is engaged in doing now
and was foretold in the Iroquois legend moreover what we think of as good may conceal much harm
and what we consider harmful may bring something of great value I've suggested two geometrical
images we should be wary of linear models in our attempts to understand the world except at the most
minutely local level and replace straight lines with helices which incorporate an acknowledgement
of the coincidence of opposites with the idea that there's always change and growth not mere
repetition as the image of the circle risks suggesting and just as there's an asymmetry
in the relationship of the hemispheres there's an asymmetry in the coincidencia opositorum
we need not difference in union but the union of the two we need not non-duality but the
non-duality of duality with non-duality and we need not just asymmetry alone or symmetry alone
but the asymmetry that is symmetry and asymmetry taken together and my last words are those of
Rabbi Jonathan Sacks the chief rabbi of Great Britain who died alas recently I heard him by
accident one day on the radio and he told the following short story a holy man is reading the
Talmud and he reads that Rabbi X says that a certain thing is the case and he reads further
and he finds that another equally revered rabbi says that X is absolutely not the case
in a sort of spiritual turmoil he does what any spiritual man would do he prays to God
which of them is right and God answers both of them are right somewhat exasperated the man says
but what do you mean they can't both be right to which God replies all three of you are right thank
thank you very much
my goodnessy and what and what a beautifully rich lecture you've just given us I know that
there would be resounding applause from the from the the the very the significant number
we had 150 or so with us here right now people would be there'd be thunderous applause right now
and on top of that there would there would be many many hands raised as the digital hands
have indeed been raised that was just a splendid not only examination of a very rich philosophical
question but you beautifully brought us in to the very complexity and the unity and the division
of unity and division that you are the unity of those things that you are seeking to bring about
in us as we were sitting here with you there are many questions here and I have some of my own but
it's important to say because there have been several people who've asked will this lecture
be available later yes absolutely we'll we'll work the audio in the video in post production and
release it as a podcast and on YouTube so stay stay tuned for that we'll make sure to alert you
if you sign up for our newsletter which you're free to do on our website if you like I also
want to say very importantly that this is a reflection that emerges from Dr. McGilchrist's
new book the matter with things which will be available if I'm not mistaken on November 9th
in the United States perhaps sooner in other locales but do pay attention for that announcement
and pick up a copy of this wonderfully rich text when and as you can now there are many questions
here as I say and we could spend our whole lives in a way in this question in a way we
do spend our whole lives in the reality that you have been making manifest to us in this lecture
I mean this is the world this is the this is precisely what we're living in all the time
and it is in fact I would say also precisely this
insight that in some sense Ralston College as a whole venture aims to help bring about
you know there's a kind of post enlightenment conceit that the only thing we can know so
as far as we can know anything at all is in kind of empirical propositional manner and in a sense
from that standpoint you know beauty or justice or love or indeed properly speaking even truth
itself these are incomprehensible and so your lecture has is bringing about the the kind of
thinking that is necessary to really think about these deepest realities and so my first question
Ian is how must our conception of reason change in order for us to see that a grasp of the unity
of opposites is not incompatible with reason a very very good question thank you Stephen
takes me to another very important point and there are different meanings to the word reason
and in the book I have three chapters on the nature of reason
and it will not surprise you that I am a great fan of reason as I am a great fan of empirical
science and I do also happen to believe that it's a mistake to try and take empirical science
into areas where it simply has no jurisdiction and to take certain kinds of rationalizing
into areas where it cannot be illuminating but I believe we need to make a distinction between
things that are beyond the grasp of well we need to make two distinctions one is between
things that are beyond the grasp of what people commonly conceive of as reason
and things that are within its grasp and the other distinction is between kinds of reason
on the first one there is nothing irrational about my love for and my defense of a great piece of
music I often say Schubert C major quintet because increasingly it has come over my life to be
seen as one of the most powerful pieces of music ever written one of the deepest
and yet I cannot in any way rationalize why it works or how it works and if I could I'd
be only talking about a few mechanisms either in the brain or in the structure of harmonics
that would leave the real truth of it what it is doing and what it is untouched so there should be
a word for a realm which is trans-rational or supra-rational and that is I think a concept we
need to take back into our lives much that we value in in nature in art in music in human life in
approach to the sacred is not irrational just because it cannot be stated purely in logical
terms and the other is a defense of a different kind of reason so in English unfortunately we
don't make much of a distinction but in Greek in Latin and in German there are distinct words for
two kinds of reason one is the carrying out of logical procedures in the way that a computer
could be taught to do and the other is what was always considered the flower of education and the
flower of a civilization the capacity to produce people who were reasonable people my god how
nostalgic that makes me when I look at the world around me and how very few voices I hear
that I can call reasonable voices and what I mean by reasonable are not consumed with hatred
rage misunderstanding malice the ability to take things out of context to understand them in some
purely reduced abstracted way but to put together the fruits of being able to think reasonably
rationally and and logically together with an understanding of humanity in all its complexity
and that life simply isn't a matter of following certain rules and that the more you know the more
you understand you don't know that's a very different kind of reasoning one that cannot emerge
from a computer but in an age in which everything is increasingly handed over to a system a computerized
system with which we have to interact whatever it is we're doing we are encouraged into a black
and white either or abstracted disembodied decontextualized this is what it is or it isn't
black and white way of thinking which is the precise opposite the precise opposite of everything
I've just argued for I am so glad we're recording this um Ian let me uh let me take us back for
a minute I want to talk a little bit later in our Q&A and there are several questions pertaining to
education and to sort of the question of what can we do but I want to go back for a minute to
the ancient Greeks because there's just following the pre-socratics that you described in Greek
history we have the Sophists and one of the things the Sophists do and I think people who are paying
attention to our current intellectual climate will see this move all around them is they their
their expertise is in showing that any particular position is partial that it's insufficient on
its own but then to use that apparent insufficiency to conclude essentially that there is no truth at
all as a protagonist says man is the measure of all things that is to say there is no there is no
coherence to reality itself there is no truth beyond the insufficiency of the particulars and so
what I'm what I'm wanting to ask you is this is what does all this mean that truth is that rather
than the insufficiency of the particular showing that there is no truth and certainly today the
claim is that truth itself is just a a mechanism or construct of the will to power that rather than
that that precisely in these particularities in the movement between the opposites is revealed
uncovered made real made manifest something larger deeper more sovereign than the insufficiency
of the particulars might initially have us believe well you do you do ask the best questions
even again a very difficult one I'll try to answer as economically as I can
I think the first thing I'd say is behind the title no matter with things is my dissatisfaction
with the way in which we think of everything not just material things which the matter with
things refers to as things we think about reality as a thing we think about truth as a thing
actually interestingly etymologically it begins as a process that involves a relationship between
people and I argue that there is truth there is no one truth there is no one single truth
and we can never ultimately know the whole of that truth but some things are truer than others
otherwise we wouldn't say anything there'd be no reason for saying anything at all or even getting
out of bed or moving because really everything would be as worthless or pointless or as meaningful
or meaningless as everything else this cannot possibly be the case nobody acts like this
so the problem arises from two positions that I call rot and mumbo rot is the acronym reality
out there that the justice of reality somewhere out there and it's untouched by us and it's
our job to find it and when we do find it it has nothing of us about it the other I call
mumbo which is that reality is made up miraculously by ourselves another acronym and what I'm
talking about there is the opposite position beloved of some postmodernist that there is no
truth because everybody's truth has its own validity I argue from the very word go and
if people want to find this they will find what are my my comments on it of course we extended
over the entire book which is a very long book but I have something to say about it in the first
ten pages also of volume one of the book and what I'm really emphasizing is that it is neither
a thing in here nor a thing out there but is a relationship a reverberative relationship between
whatever it is I mean by my consciousness and the conscious cosmos outside of what I consider my
consciousness and it's in that coming together of my internal sense of myself with whatever it is
that exists that is apart from me at least never ultimately separate from me but utterly distinct
from me it's in that coming together that we embark on the process of reality of discovering
reality and the first volume my books in two volumes the first volume is called the ways
to truth so not a suggestion that it is a journey that may never actually be achieved
but it's still an important journey and the second volume is called what then is true
an open question but effectively what I'm doing in the first part of the book is saying what can
we take as a guide on our journey towards truth I think knowing more about what the brain is
telling us can help that's part one neuroscience and I think epistemology the business of studying
the values of reason science and intuition and imagination their strengths and values
that can tell us when we take those together and look at the cosmos what do we find and what I
suggest in part three which is metaphysics is that we find the cosmos very different from the one
made up of just a heap of bits that we're told is the nature of the universe we find something
that has inherent beauty complexity order a drive has is not alien to us has this paradoxical
structure that I've alluded to partly here and in which time is very real consciousness is very
real foundational indeed an element in the cosmos that cannot be reduced and that values too are
foundational so that's where the whole drift goes my goodness we're never going to get through all
these questions because they're so they're so difficult and I just want to thank everyone who
we do have some time and we're going to get through many of them but I want to thank everyone for
sending your questions and I am going to share these afterwards with Dr. McGilchrist in the event
he should ever find an occasion or wish to undertake he does have a channel in which he
he shares his work called channel McGilchrist and it may be that he will find time to answer some
additional questions there beyond our session today here is here's one from Benedict Ian
he says I'd be interested to hear more on the origins of your understanding of this idea at
what point did the notion of the coincidence of opposites and in particular of the symmetry
and asymmetry first occurred to you and how did this awareness come to you and this may this
question may lead us a bit later to the many questions on what we can do and what forms of
education are adequate to bringing about the reasonable kind of disposition that you were
describing and praising a moment ago I think that probably like most
of certainly I can only speak for myself but most of the ideas that still
inspire me intrigue me and draw me onwards to further attempts at understanding they started
in my teens I had a very philosophical education I was very lucky in that respect
and I was taught a number of things as not dogmatically that these were true but they were
the assumptions behind what I was told one would be that a thing and its opposite are you know
irreconcilable and this is an Aristotelian position that's perfectly respectable and another was that
history moves in linear trajectories and I thought no I already thought in my teens no it moves in
sort of circles or spirals and I thought when you you know one of the things I noticed in politics
was that it was more in common between people on either the extreme left or the extreme right than
there was with people who might be thought of as in a completely different realm in a much more
moderate realm I now incidentally think that it's hard to get a razor blade between fundamentalist
atheists and fundamentalist theists and that these people share very left hemisphere assumptions
about the nature of the world that are completely foreign to most people who call themselves honest
diagnostics or honest believers but there we go that's for another time but I think that what
it was perceptions like that that bitterness and sweetness often complemented one another
and led into one another that in certain ways pain and pleasure were necessary to one another
that you know that as Blake says contrary is fulfill one another I already was feeling that
experiencing that as a young person and I thought also that the world is not inert and
unresponsive but something that is responsive essentially that all experience all reality
is reverberative I can't think of a better word a resonance a coming a responsibility we have a
responsibility for it and it for us response of course comes from the root of calling to
and calling back and forth so this sound of it this idea of a sound resonance going back and
forwards and a movement reverberation or back and forwards between two things that we thought
of as distinct and perhaps not not not mutually influencing one another was another profound
perception so I think that that together with my rejection of linearity as a useful model for
anything living or anything I experienced and the sense that opposites came here and that when you
pursued one you soon found that you were achieving the opposite of the thing that the very thing you
thought you were trying to achieve that I noticed in my teens and you know when I look around me
now I'm astonished that people don't see how in pursuing goals that they would call you know
humane goals to do with all kinds of high ideals that the result can be so different from anything
resembling those ideals so there you go famously political systems are founded on
great ideals of liberty equality and fraternity end up to be illiberal unfraternal and unequal
you know I want to ask you want to make this as
concrete in a way as I can one of the things that comes out in the lovely Iroquois
legend that you shared with us to read is that the he grasps the sky with both hands the the
one figure represents as you write one's higher identity in the midst of action in the world and
what what the fact that we're able to perceive opposites
as we go through time and find our way through them to deeper understanding what that must mean
is that our own subjectivity our own souls our own person hoods whatever we are as entities
in some sense is in the image of or has access to that unity that is both
higher than but also revealed by an in and through division and
so I have it of course we're in big matters here but I have a few questions about that
and some of these are trying doing my best to gather up the questions that are
wonderfully wonderfully expressed let me say in this Q&A we have 55 questions here
are beautiful deep questions we're really this is really the question in a way of our time
how do we move to a standpoint then which we don't lose ourselves in division and I don't
mean simply culturally we can come to that but I mean ourselves how do we ourselves develop
habits or practices what are the the the manners and modes according to which we can
recollect or come to the awareness that we are in in the whole
yes what of course is strange is that we have to talk about that because in most cultures other
than our own modern western one it would seem obvious that we were part of a whole
one of the most difficult things is the concept of the environment to me I reject the term
because it suggests something that is around you but is not you whereas nature is something
out of which we are born which is what the word nature means something that is giving birth
and back into which we go so being surrounded by nature as well as bringing a host of
health benefits incidentally both physical and psychological and spiritual benefits helps us
see ourselves not as isolated beings as it were skittering around on the repellent surface of an
alien world but actually deeply deeply embedded in a world that has roots and we have roots in it
music poetry and painting but for me particularly music and poetry
bring us together with other minds and spirits though those of those who made them and those
that we can feel respond to them one of the most rewarding things for me during the first year
of lockdown was that every day for 365 days I read a new poem not one of mine but a poem
I considered a great poem on the internet and I must say I found it very healing myself and a
lot of people wrote to me in very moving terms saying that in this spell of isolation that it made
them feel more together with humanity then I think there is the whole way in which we conceive
what a society is not an agglomeration of atomistic individuals each out to fulfill their
whatever they can get for themselves and whatever they can make of themselves but to see that only
in the service to society as a whole that what you achieve is only valuable in as much as it
goes back to making a society a better place what you what you want you need of course yourself
we're not saints we need food and we need a lot more in order to to be happy but we don't need
extraordinary amounts of things and in our society our attitudes that our self-esteem
our independence of mind our independence of action that we can do what we like
is is odd historically it's odd and I know from talking to some people from other oriental cultures
that to them this emphasis on self-esteem and self-determination seems literally sick I mean
that's the word that's been used I mean that's sick and I would like of course as always to
be able to try and see the virtues in um individuation which is very important and I don't
think that oriental cultures negate that at all they they believe it's very important but in the
service of fulfillment of the whole so once again that force for division that left hemisphere a bit
is incredibly creative and important but in service of a bigger differentiated whole so I see the
whole business of things coming into being as not splitting apart but rather like some very
enfolded flower imagine the sort of infinitely enfolded infinitely rich flower that had florets
within florets in some sort of um fractal way and what happened was that they unfolded and within
them something else unfolded and so on the flower was still a flower the flower had that
potential but now that potential has been fulfilled and you therefore have togetherness with
and wholeness but at the same time individuation I hope that's a sort of relatively brief gloss on that
yes I want to I want to drive further into the question of what you know if we're if as I think
it's clear we're living in a time of very significant alienation and division I mean
there are all kinds of metrics according to which we can understand that we can see the proofs or
signs of that the the question on many of our questioner's minds is is is what can we do what are
the the the forms of life and culture the institutions the the practices that that that
bring us or foster the bringing of us both into ourselves more fully precisely by
awakening us in the way that you're describing to our place within in the whole what are the
you mentioned of course music and poetry and painting in the in the arts I have the sense
that some of our questioners are are trying to ask the question of or indeed are asking the
question very explicitly at the big picture where have we gone wrong and what can we rebuild and how
well of course that is the big question an easy one to ask in the very very difficult one to answer
and
not just in the sense that it's hard to make a prescription but that the very fact of trying
to make a prescription may be the wrong thing to do in that my prescription may close down
options rather than open them up and what the left hemisphere always wants is to close down on
the certainty whereas the right hemisphere wants to open up into a possibility and I'll just say
it very briefly because people may have heard me say it before but as a psychiatrist one of the
things you learn very early on is you may know exactly what a person needs to do but you must
not tell them not because you're being sort of frustrating but because to begin with you make
the mistake of telling people and they go oh no I can't do that that wouldn't make any sense for me
and then you have to allow them to come to a place where they see for themselves and sometimes
a year or 18 months later they will come to you and say you know I know what it is I need to do
and it's exactly what you told them 18 months ago but so it's no good giving a prescription
because people won't follow it or they will think if there's a prescription I can relax because then
I do these six bullet points that Dr. McGilchrist has mentioned and phew it's all going to be fine
again but it isn't all going to be fine again it may be fine but it will never be fine again in the
same way the world that we are leaving behind cannot be recreated and cannot and must not be
perpetuated and I often say if we could reverse the poisoning of the oceans the felling of the
forests and the destruction of the ways of life of indigenous people around the world which I very
much hope we can it would all be in vain if we just carry it on being the same dissatisfied
unhappy isolated neurotic people that we now are looking for stuff to get oh thank god we
haven't destroyed the rainforest that means the world economy won't collapse and the weather
patterns won't be damaging no the reason for not destroying the rainforest is that they are
the most extraordinary expression of what this whole cosmos is about they are a wonder of complexity
and beauty that is valuable in itself not as the left hemisphere always thinks for some utility
of its own so having said that is there anything I can say to indicate ways of going well I'm going
to say some rather in the tradition of my talk slightly opposite things I think first of all
very obviously that education needs to be much more concerned with things like philosophy
teaching people how to think which is not done by shoving information in and then seeing whether
they've retained it that is the opposite of teaching people how to think one exercise that every
school child every school child should do regularly and shouldn't be allowed to be to leave school
without knowing how to do this is to take any point of view argue forcibly for it and then
immediately turn around and argue more emphatically for the or more convincingly let me say for the
opposite point of view because every point of view has its pros and its cons and I think that
yes things like poetry music and so on and history in fact the humanities in general how do we
understand ourselves if we know nothing about our history and not just a caricature version
of history through a filter that happens to be a set of conceptions and preconceptions we have now
but more broadly as broadly and generously as we can and one of the things about the humanities
is not imposing on it a grid of your own but trying to come to it and see another way of
thinking that other people before you had that may be very different from your own but by no
means stupid and make and seal values that you yourself don't see so all of that I think but
I also think it's very important for education to be rigorous children like to be challenged and
they do actually need to learn things that are difficult you know perhaps an ancient language
certainly mathematics they do need to understand good science imaginative science science doesn't
have to be killingly boring in the way that it's so often taught science is a is an adventure and
if science is not taught as an adventure the teachers need to be sacked because it is it's a
wonderful exciting adventure just as exciting as learning poetry and music these things are not at
war with one another they are part of one another but if we are only soft on ourselves and on our
children our civilization won't survive because there's a sort of prisoner's dilemma here is that
it's okay for us to go oh well we're just going to be very relaxed and we're going to do tai chi and
we you know all of which I you know don't have any problem with and would enrich an education and
doing some mindfulness ought to be part of any school day everybody should learn it but we actually
also do need to learn some toughness of mind and toughness of body because there are nations in
this world who will aren't just waiting peacefully for you know it's the old story that if you if
you want peace prepare for war now I'm not this is not a remark about our military strategy at all
it's just saying that we can't afford to be off our guard there's a wonderful book um called um
immoderate greatness by patrick offles it's only 80 pages long and it's considerably the best 80
pages in terms of bang for buck that you could ever read and it's why all civilizations fail
eventually and often quite quickly and it has six reasons three of them are sort of more or less
environmental ones and to do with the resource issues and the other three are to do with the
way we stop behaving and the stop thinking and in amongst them is this inability to think the
way you need to think and act the way you need to act if you're going to defend the civilization
yes clearly we're dealing with a civilizational matter here and I think it's very important
that we underline that these the truths you're pointing to the unity that transcends and is
made manifest by the opposites these modes of thinking these are not the mere you know
speculations but an uncovering of what is most fundamentally real this is not an exercise
simply or a uh a kind of trivial mental show but to uncover most rigorously what is most
profound and animating um on a on a kind of optimistic or questioningly optimistic note
one questioner uh Rania Rania asks beginning with a quote from what you've said many aspects
of our current plight can be related to our complete failure to understand this essential
truth of opposites end quote that was from the abstract that you kindly circulated and then
the questioner continues but given that we are part of creation slash existence itself is not
this failure to understand also part of the journey on a deeper plane that is does not the plight
and failure of understanding in itself in and of itself provide an opposite of sorts to actual
understanding and from what we might say and thus perhaps we might hope that our encounter
with this opposite of privation and division may precisely be a move towards a recovery of
a deeper higher more sovereign unity well well that's another fabulous question I mean
um they're just coming in thick and fast this is wonderful uh I mean in brief I absolutely agree
with that um I think one of my themes was that we do not know out of what apparent um
downturns of fortune something good may come and out of what apparent upturns of fortune
bad may come and I think we've seen and are seeing both so I absolutely agree with that
it's the famous chinese story you know bad luck good luck who knows you can't see what's coming
down the line as the outcome of a certain particular set of circumstances and I think I go further and
say that actually out of a certain degree of suffering comes a degree of wisdom it's not
a popular point of view these days and there is I certainly not an argument for in any sense
increasing or not doing what you can to minimize suffering don't misunderstand me but nonetheless
suffering will exist and life has a lot of suffering in it for anybody who's at all um alive to
the suffering of others for a start but out of it some good can come and that's a
profound truth in all spiritual traditions also I think that not knowing is very important
a sense of perplexity a sense of I really don't understand this not just because I'm not bright
enough to but because actually this is something that is beyond the understanding of any single
human individual at this point is a very helpful point of view and I argue in the second part of
the book particularly for the wisdom which is hardly a new thing to anyone who understands the
wisdom traditions of China and of India and Japan and the Far East in general
the wisdom of unknowing and the wisdom of not doing I mean in a way a lot of the questions
are going so what do we what do we do you know and I would say well actually one of the first
things to do and actually this is true of talking to a psychiatric patient is well have you thought
of trying not doing all the things that you currently are doing because they're not making
things better are they and the image that I think is useful here is because we think we
make everything happen this is the left hemisphere talking it is the one that makes things happen it
has an agenda it makes things accord to its will but in fact very little in life can be made to
accord to your will again all the wise philosophers and sages have said to this said this the secret
of happiness and fulfilment in life is not trying to force the world to your will but according
your will to the world and learning how to as it were surf the waves rather than stand there and
be smashed to pieces by them so the image that helps me is that of a gardener does a gardener
make a plant grow absolutely not a gardener can either make everything as beneficial as it can
for that plant to grow to foster the flourishing of the plant or it can stifle the plant those are
the options but they can't make the plant grow so when people are talking about so what do we do
how do we make the right human beings well the first thing is to stop doing a lot of what we're
doing now and listen listen in the space I mean one of the ways to understand things is to stop
constantly holding forth I'm sorry I mean by the nature of this thing I'm spending a lot of time
holding forth right now but one of the things I try to build into my days is is listening sitting
listening and so I don't think we do enough of that it's not a passive process it's what I call
active passivity it's putting yourself in a position of readiness receptiveness
and often you understand an answer to what needs to be done at this point when you do that whereas
if you carry on arguing what in the Oriental tradition is called monkey mind chattering away
about what we must do you missus all together so once again it's not that we need to do nothing
and that we know nothing but it's that we need to combine our knowingness with unknowingness
and we need to combine our idea of action with a kind of active passivity
again the conjunction of opposites is important yes and certainly in for example the play by
Sophocles, Oedipus Rex in a way that whole play is about the tragedy of what happens when we assume
that what we think we know is absolute and in a way that is related to this next question
from Elizabeth about the pain and alienation of our moment she asks do you think the suicide
crisis amongst young people is partially a result of discouraging creative and critical
thinking in the school system thereby imprisoning them in the no exit left brain
yes again I'm sorry I don't always say to every question what a wonderful question but it is
we're just getting all the important questions um I mean obviously in part I would it is part
of the answer yes the undoubtedly the case um however that epidemic of suicide and the underlying
angst depression despair emptiness boredom that seemed to characterize
the world that young people are inheriting has many causes and really one way of looking at my
book the matter with things is I'm trying to say well what is the matter with things
um and one is this view that we are nothing but I talk about the school of nothing but
in which you know people say oh it's nothing but or we're nothing but and so on this is always
fallacious it's always um hiding a piece of shoddy thinking because nothing is ever nothing but
anything else um however um I think it comes from many causes I think all the things that
what we essentially need is meaning a life without meaning is not a worth living it's not
worth life worth living um and I want to get rid of one misconception right away this doesn't
mean that we should invent meaning it means that we should discover meaning meaning is there
all right beauty is there all right complexity is there all right purpose is there I argue
and I can't have time to argue that but I do in the book all right they're there
but it is our task to respond to them to see them and to incorporate them and when we do
life becomes rich we start to flourish society starts to flourish when we don't the opposite
of all those things is the case and what has very much struck me and I referred to one of these
in the end of the master and his emissary is the effect of social cohesion so belonging to
a cohesive social group which is not just a group of people a bubble sphere on the internet that
just happened to share opinions but a living group of people who are able hard at the moment I know
but to share their lives you know I refer to the research on close Italian communities in the east
coast of America where communities carried on the ways of life that they brought from Italy
in which they they had they did all kinds of things that were very bad for their health like
eat fatty food drink loads smoke loads not take a huge amount of exercise and they turned out to have
lower rates of heart disease and so on and very much happier than the rest of the population
and why was this because they had huge what's called social capital social belonging they
they all knew where they belong in society that's the first the second is belonging in nature and
we've done everything we can to alienate ourselves from nature to treat it as a resource that is to
be exploited and many of us don't live surrounded by nature sadly I mean it's have no choice other
than to live in this dispossessed concrete world but that that research on this is massive makes a
huge difference to cognitive ability to memory but also to sense of happiness and anxiety to
sense of worth and to behavior and the third one surprise surprise is spirituality is believing
in a spiritual world and preferably being actively involved in the community that
worship together so these three things are now rather rare in our world and where they exist
they do help but if you really wanted to make a totally miserable world what you'd do is take
people as far away from the natural world as possible and surround them by by machines and
virtuality you would disrupt society set individual against individual and say everybody has a right
to do whatever they want to do quite regardless of what might be good for the well-being of a
community in the society and you tell people that religion was all rotten that essentially they
didn't mean anything the world didn't mean anything and the sooner it was over the better
if you do that you'll make a very very unhappy world and the evidence is that we are I'll finish
with just one thing I have to mention because it's so staggering research by American psychologist
Jean Twenge on adolescence between the 1930s and now is based on the same test being administered
in the same words to the same age group over that period of over 70 years so it's not the
retrospective scope and open to interpretation they just ask them the same questions about how
happy they were how anxious they were etc etc there's quite a lot of these questions and what it
found was that anxiety depression loneliness and a sense of the worthlessness of life was five to
eight times higher in 2007 than it had been in 1930 so for all the improvements that we
think we've brought about in our world where everybody must be much happier now people are
not much happier now that should stop us thinking and it's not five to eight percent higher which
would be kind of significant it's five to eight times as many
she's there's such deep matters you know I I know our time is is short I want to ask you
just a couple of final questions and one of them I want to begin just by reading back this lovely
line of of hurtle and that you've given us in the reading the heart's wave would never have
risen up so beautifully in its cloud of spray and become spirit were it not for the grim old
cliff of destiny standing in its way we have a questioner who is asking about love
it does love show away and if I can try to put this together what I
want to ask is
first you know love in our own personal you know in our lives you know the lives in which we
encounter love this does have to do with the unity of the opposites you know we that's what
forgiveness is is the overcoming in a way of an opposite it's the the the holding on to someone
to
to discover in that relationship and in them and for them to discover in themselves a
a beauty a unity that abides and that perhaps becomes more beautiful in and through the the
the suffering or division or difficulty or hardness of life and
and yet I I think one thing that many people struggle with the alienation the the sense of
sadness of loneliness somehow at a deep level psychologically that's giving up on belief that
they that they are loved that they have in themselves a abiding
hole that they are they are connected with a treads call it a transcendent hole that is
manifest in themselves but that they something very deep in the nature of things has their back
and so I'm wondering if you would say something about love as we move towards concluding
yes well of course it's not everybody's gift to be able to feel that they are loved
or have the capacity of love or that there is a something that has their back and the
the utter terribleness of depression which is something of which I have too much personal
experience and of which I've seen so much over 40 years of trying to help other people with it
is that you lose the sense that you have any of the things that normally make life worth living
it's so terrible that it can well induce despair so
obviously that is a pathological state but I'm just saying that to help anybody who's listening
who doesn't feel that comfortable feeling that they are not alone in that and that it can be
got through and that coming through it can hard as it may seem also be part of enrichment
which actually oddly relates to the grim cliff of destiny in a way that your spirit grows through
overcoming things it can be crushed and never recover for some people and that of course is
a terrible tragedy what you do with your spirit what you do with the oppositions the resistance
of which life largely consists is our business it's each person's business what they do with
that and how they respond to it and I'm all too aware how very very difficult it is so
I wouldn't wish to preach in any sense but if it's possible to get to a position where you
can see that love is not annihilated by suffering but often actually incorporate suffering and heal
suffering but it's never going to be devoid of suffering then you've reached a position of
considerable wisdom and you've said a couple are a kind of opposites and I know what you're
getting at but of course they're not really opposites in a bad way that they're individually
separate beings but they're also part of one something which is the coming together of them
and there I suppose the image that I would leave people with is like two heavenly bodies that are
orbiting one another and what you don't want is them to be so alien that they fly off into space
but what you don't want either is for them to be so sucked into one another's gravitation
that their orbits collapse and they crash together and there are couples who become as we say
in the trade fused and this is usually not a good sign and the relationship rarely survives
there needs to be a healthful distance but that distance doesn't mean alienation just as
distinction doesn't mean separation if we could only get those distinctions right in our own minds
then many many good vivifying things would follow so let me leave it at that but love I mean is
when I talk about these things and I talk about the union of things the ultimate forces it seems
to me that we know of our gravity and love and these are forces that that there are opposite
forces to them that cause other movements but that they are what gives the structure the
complexity the beauty the shape the order to everything and stop division triumphing over union
in the end that unifying force is more powerful than its opposite I don't duck the question of
the existence of evil because I think it's it's really having your cake and eat it to say there
is good but there is no evil I mean if there's a conjunction of opposites then there will be
and no religion tells you that everything is just fine and everything is good and there is no
suffering and and so on and Jesus himself didn't pray that we should all just not be quite as bad
but played for deliverance from evil I mean that those are the very words of the Lord's prayer
if they mean anything it means that there is some counterbalancing force I personally believe that
but I also believe in the same spirit that I've said everything tonight that there is an asymmetry
and I argue about that much greater length of course in a very long chapter in the book which
is like a short book itself on the sense of the sacred but there I would say that in the end it
is love that triumphs it is love that holds the day and it is love that grounds the cosmos
well those are words I think on which we should conclude today in and in gratitude I
just want to return to your image of the of the spiral and seems that these are weighty but also
exciting times that we are living in you talked about the way in which the
temporal and eternal come together the universal and the particular in a certain sense the universal
has its life only in the particulars and what I want to thank you for on behalf of all of those
who've been with us today and who and the many who will will will listen to your lecture later online
is the way that you have enlightened us to embrace our own particularity and to be open to it
as a site of revelation it's been a very very beautiful time of discussion and illumination Ian
thank you very much thank you thank you very much Stephen and thank you all of you for listening
and for such very good questions I will be sure to send you with the rest of these
magnificent questions your way as soon as as soon as we conclude that is all for now everyone thank you bye